getting started post (#10)
bitsandvolts/bitsandvolts.github.io: _posts/2021-04-02-gs_00001_computer_setup.md

---
layout: single
title: Computer Setup
category: Getting Started
permalink: /categories/getting_started/computer_setup
excerpt: "What computer do you need as a computer engineer?"
author: Bjoern Hartmann
toc: true
toc_label: "Content"
toc_sticky: true
toc_icon: "align-justify"
sidebar:
  nav: "getting_started_0"
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/getting_started.jpg
---

> Finally online! Welcome to our first **Getting Started** post. Have you ever

Reviewer: "Finally online!"

A bit out of nowhere. Maybe a bit smoother, or merge it with the "Welcome..." sentence.

> dreamed of implementing your own electrical project, but you don't quite know

Reviewer: I would prefer "electronics".

how to get started? Then you've come to the right place! This category intends
to create a solid foundation for all kinds of projects in the area of electrical
and computer engineering. Our goal is to build enough knowledge so that your

> start into the most fascinating field of electronics can be as smooth and easy

Reviewer: ?

Shouldn't it be that "electronics" is the most fascinating field of electrical and computer engineering?

as possible. But it is not only intended for beginners. Believe it or not. Even
trained engineers with several years of professional experience sometimes lack
basic knowledge.

> Let's get started and set up your machine!

Reviewer: Smoother transition. Maybe by briefly mentioning that the rest of the post deals with setting up a computer for doing electronics projects, or something.

# A computer for all needs

If you want to dive into the field of electrical or computer engineering it is
inevitable to have a suitable computer. But what does that actually mean? What
does a 'suitable' computer look like in our field? You probably already have a
computer and want to know if you can use it. Or you might want to buy a new one
and get some ideas about what to buy. Maybe you want to build a computer on your

> own. If any of these apply to you, you've come to the right place.

Reviewer: "to the right place"

Repetition from intro.

This post covers several aspects. First, it explains the most important computer
parts. We all want the best deal at the lowest price, right? Therefore, it is
essential to understand terms like CPU, RAM, SSD, and so on to compare market
offers. Second, we will discuss what kind of computer is required for most
electrical and computer engineering tasks. Is it a high-end machine? Spoiler
alert! It is not! The third part of this blog deals with the option of building

> a computer yourself. This is a great option if you want to completely decide for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a computer by yourself. This is a great option if you want to completely decide for
```

> yourself what goes into your computer. After talking mainly about hardware

Reviewer: "yourself" repeated from prev. sentence.

aspects, the fourth part will introduce the three major operating systems,
namely Windows, Mac OS, and Linux. Which one is most commonly used by engineers?
There is also the possibility of using multiple operating systems, which will be
explained in the last part.

Please feel free to skip to the part that is of interest to you. If you have
additional thoughts, we welcome your comments below.

# Computer parts

Every desktop computer contains the same key parts like a processor, memories, a
mainboard, and some sort of cooling. Each part can vary greatly from computer to
computer, both in performance and price. The price range for a usual personal
computer ranges from a few hundred euros up to a few thousand. Of course, there
is no limit to the price. If you choose a computer you need to answer two

> questions. Does the performance justify the price and does the performance fit

Reviewer: Colon?
```suggestion
questions: Does the performance justify the price and does the performance fit
```

my requirements? For both questions, it is useful to be able to assess the power
of a computer. In the following, you will get an overview of the most important
components of a computer and learn how to evaluate them.

## CPU

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-left">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_cpu.jpeg" alt="">
</figure>

> Let's start with the brain of the computer, the Central Processing Unit (CPU).

Reviewer: I would put it in bold.

```suggestion
Let's start with the brain of the computer, the **Central Processing Unit** (CPU).
```

> As the name suggests it processes the main part of operations that are defined

Reviewer: What does "main part" mean? Doesn't a CPU process every operation?

```suggestion
As the name suggests it processes the operations that are defined
```

by a computer program. Often the term processor is used as a synonym, however,
be aware of the fact that there can be multiple processors inside a computer. If
you read computer advertisements you probably come across phrases like
'Quad-Core CPU at 3.6 GHz'. Indeed, these are two properties that describe the
performance of a CPU.

> 3.6 GHz means that 3.6 billion instructions can theoretically be processed per

Reviewer: Processed by who? Better explicitly say CPU:
```suggestion
3.6 GHz means that the CPU can theoretically process 3.6 billion instructions per second.
```

> second. So it describes something like the speed of the processor. Obviously,

Reviewer: I would put the part where it says "speed = frequency" in a sentence before.

```suggestion
second. So it describes something like the speed of the processor. That speed is also known as the **frequency** of the CPU. Obviously, the higher the frequency the better the performance.
```

the higher the speed or usually called frequency the better the performance. In
the past, this was a simple metric to decide which processor is the better one.
However, at some point, a physical boundary was reached and the frequency could
not be raised further. Manufacturers had to come up with other ideas to further
improve their CPUs. One of them was to introduce parallelization with

> multi-cores.

Reviewer: Maybe bold?

```suggestion
**multi-cores**.
```

> Progress in technology made it possible to put multiple processors on a single

Reviewer: I would introduce this section with somthing like "With multiple cores more work can be done. However, that does not mean that all of your programs will suddenly run 8 times faster if you choose an 8-core CPU! ..."

chip and divide tasks between them. This task, however, is not as simple as it
first sounds. There might be dependencies between tasks or tasks might require
the same information or resource. Imagine you want to make pizza. You have to
put the cheese on the pizza before you put it in the oven and everyone needs to
read the recipe. One friend helping you is useful. Ten friends, however, will
probably not make the pizza finish faster. The same applies to processors.
Double the number of processors does not lead to twice as fast execution.
Nowadays, every CPU for desktop computers consists of multiple cores.

The following question arises: Is a processor with higher clock speed and fewer
cores better than a processor with lower clock speed and more cores? This
becomes a non-trivial question since it depends on your application. In the
extreme case, a program makes no use of parallelism at all. Then, the multicore

> feature is useless.

Reviewer: I would put the last sentence from the prev section ("Nowadays, every CPU for desktop computers consists of multiple cores.") here.

## DDR SDRAM (RAM)

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-right">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_ram.jpeg" alt="">
</figure>

A computer combines multiple memories, which differ in size and access speed.

> Random Access Memory (RAM) is a medium-sized memory with medium speed. It is

Reviewer: Bold
```suggestion
**Random Access Memory** (RAM) is a medium-sized memory with medium speed. It is
```
"medium" compared to what? You didn't mention any other memory before to which RAM would be "medium" compared to.

used to store application data on a short-term basis. For a fast computer, it is
crucial to provide enough RAM since otherwise, the data has to be stored on a
slower drive which results in a noticeable slow performance. Additionally, the
data rate and latency of the memory are important. Data rate describes the
amount of data that can be written/read in a given time. It is usually expressed

> in a frequency unit. Latency describes the time you have to wait until you get

Reviewer: Give an example
```suggestion
in a frequency unit (e.g., MHz). Latency describes the time you have to wait until you get
```

> the data out of the memory. Even data rate and latency sound similar, they are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the data out of the memory. Even though data rate and latency sound similar, they are
```

not the same. I am sure this will come up again in a later post. Short-term
means for this memory that the data is only valid as long as the computer runs.
As soon as you turn it off, all data will be lost. This is the main reason why
you should properly shut down a computer to make sure all data is stored in a

> long-term memory, which is explained next.

Reviewer: Maybe put in italics, to high-light the difference
```suggestion
_long-term_ memory, which is explained next.
```

## HDD and SDD

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-left">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_hdd.jpeg" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">HDD</figcaption>
</figure>

Nowadays two different kinds of long-term memories find their way into home

> computers. A Hard Disk Drive (HDD) was the only choice in the past, whereas a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
computers. A **Hard Disk Drive** (HDD) was the only choice in the past, whereas a
```

> Solid State Drive (SDD) is a newer and faster memory type. HDD is a mechanical

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Solid State Drive** (SDD) is a newer and faster memory type. HDD is a mechanical
```

storage where some platters are spinning and a read arm reads and writes the
data. The mechanical part tends to make noise and the platters set a limit on
how small the drive can be manufactured. Moreover, the motor that spins the

> platters requires additional energy.

Reviewer: Maybe mention, that it also takes some time for the read arm to reach the area to read, or something.

Compared to that, an SSD is not mechanical and typically uses flash (do not

> worry if you do not know what it is) instead. So, there is no noise of spinning

Reviewer: Maybe add this?
```suggestion
worry if you do not know what it is; it's basically like the SD card in your phone, or a USB drive) instead. So, there is no noise of spinning
```

platters, the SSD can be very small and light (very good for laptops!), the
energy consumption is lower (also good for laptops!) and an SSD is faster than a

> HDD. Sounds almost too good to be true, right? Why are HDDs still used?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HDD. Sounds almost too good to be true, right? Why are HDDs still used then?
```

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-right">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_ssd.png" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">SSD</figcaption>
</figure>

> From early days there exists the myth that SDDs will die early, but, this is

Reviewer: Put in new sentence:
```suggestion
From early days there exists the myth that SDDs will die early. But this is
```

> nothing you have to concern about as a usual user. One concern, however, is the

Reviewer: "usual user" sounds weird. Maybe like this:
```suggestion
nothing you have to concern about as a normal user. One concern, however, is the
```

price. As of today, SDDs are more expensive. This is why SSDs are often combined
with HDDs. The SSD is used for important things like your operating system and
the HDD is used for data that is rarely used and where you do not care so much
about the speed. If you want to see a race between an HDD and an SDD starting
computer you can watch [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4f4saFpRlvU)

> video.

Reviewer: We should mention that the SSD is smaller in size than the HDD (e.g., 120-250GB vs. 500GB-2TB)

## Graphics Card (GPU)

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-left">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_gpu.jpeg" alt="">
</figure>

> As the name suggests the graphics card was developed for extensive graphics like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the name suggests the graphics card was developed for handling extensive graphics applications like
```

> in computer games. Over time, they also became attractive for computationally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
computer games. Over time, they also became attractive for computationally
```

> intensive applications such as neural networks. This is because their design is

Reviewer: Not sure about "neural networks". A newbie might not know what a neural network is, but probably has heard of "machine learning".

If we write machine learning, that the next sentence with "matrix operations" is not fully true anymore. But for me it's fine when we leave it out.

optimized for matrix operations. A graphics card is not a mandatory part, so it
is possible to save some money. Be warned! A graphics card is often the part

> that makes a computer super expensive. In the case, you want to save that money

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that makes a computer super expensive. In case you want to save that money,
```

you need to pay attention that the processor includes a graphics unit.
Meanwhile, these included graphics units are quite good and it is also possible
to play light games with them. Graphics cards are also of interest if you plan
to have a setup with multiple monitors. Most people I know use one or two

> monitors at home. This should be fine with the integrated graphics unit.

Reviewer: Confusing.

On one hand "graphics cards are good for multipe monitors", but "This should be fine with the integrated graphics unit."

## Mainboard

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-right">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_mainboard.jpeg" alt="">
</figure>

The mainboard or motherboard is the place where everything is put together. The

> mainboard is a board where you can plugin in the parts mentioned above as well

Reviewer: Maybe like this?
```suggestion
mainboard is a printed circuit board where you can plugin in the parts mentioned above as well
```
On the other hand, a newbie might not know what a PCB is, so I'm not sure..

as a power supply and cooling fans. It also provides external interfaces like

> USB ports. This is the place where everything communicates with each other.

Reviewer: Last sentence sound a bit weak.

Author: any ideas?

# Is a high-end computer necessary?

No! Definitely no! But well ... It depends!. If you just want to get some

> experience in coding a cheap computer like a Raspberry Pi is enough. If you plan

Reviewer: Comma:
```suggestion
experience in coding, a cheap computer like a Raspberry Pi is enough. If you plan
```

Also, a Raspi is not a "normal" computer as described in this post. So it sounds a bit out of place. Also a newbie might not know that a Raspi is a one-board computer.

Maybe say:
```suggestion
experience in coding, you technically don't even need to have full-blown computer. There are even small pocket-sized computers, such as the Raspberry Pi, that can be used like a "normal" computer. If you plan
```

to work with algorithms that process a huge amount of data or are

> computationally expensive such as machine learning you require a computer with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
computationally expensive, such as machine learning, you require a computer with
```

> higher performance. In electrical engineering, often powerful algorithms are

Reviewer: Sounds like PnR is the only algorithm used in EE.

> used to place and route circuits. This will be needed in our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used to place and route circuits. If you plan to design you own chip, then having a powerful computer can speed up the process (by the way, in case you haven't seen it already, we also have another category, [Digital Design](/categories/digital_design/), where we will talk about how chips are designed).
```

[Digital Design](/categories/digital_design/) category. But still, it does not
have to be a high-end computer. As an example, I paid 447€ for my computer plus
127€ for a graphics card. The latter I mostly use for gaming so you can ignore
it. I will give a more detailed description in the next section.

# Build your own computer

Building a computer on your own is not as hard as it sounds. The challenging
part is to choose parts that match your application as well as your budget. The
rest is more or less putting some cables together. I will not go into detail for
the latter part since you can find enough videos like
[this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7DVOQrs1N40) on Youtube. Please,
understand that the market situation can change rapidly, so the following is
more an example and the situation could have changed until you read this post.

The first thing I usually do is to search for something like 'Best PC build
under 500€ 2021' and read a few articles. Many people periodically scan the
market for good deals. This is a good way to get a market overview. Then I
usually start with the selection of a CPU. As mentioned earlier it is not easy

> to directly compare CPUs. So-called benchmarks try to provide an overall score

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to directly compare CPUs. So-called **benchmarks** try to provide an overall score
```

"overall score" for what? The CPU?

Additionally, a mark/price ranking is provided as shown in the picture below.

<figure class="align-center">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_mark_price.jpeg" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">Best CPU value (Mark/Price)
  </figcaption>
</figure>

In this case, I would probably choose the AMD Ryzen 3 3200G as it provides
enough power at a reasonable price and includes a graphics unit, so an
additional graphics card is not required. Processors are usually available as
'boxed' or 'tray' versions. The boxed version is intended for end-users and
includes a heat sink and fan. The fan is mostly not the best available, but in
my experience, it is always fine so I would not bother and just buy the boxed
one.

Next, a mainboard is required. Make sure that you choose one that matches the
socket of the processor which is in this case an AM4. An example could be the
B450M PRO-VDH MAX. It offers enough interfaces like 4 DIMM slots for your RAM, 4
SATA connectors for your HDD and SDD drives, in total 6 USB 3.2 ports, VGA,
HDMI, and DVI-D for your monitors.

As for RAM, I would use 2 x 8 GB DDR4 memory. Note that you have to match the

> specification of the motherboard and CPU. If the CPU requires a DDR4 you cannot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specification of the motherboard and CPU. If the CPU requires DDR4 you cannot
```

> use DDR3 memory as an example. Also, pay attention to the clock speed. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use a RAM with DDR3. Also, pay attention to the clock speed. The
```

higher the speed the better the performance as long it is supported by the CPU

> and motherboard. Additionally, there exists a maximal number of RAMs as well as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and motherboard. Additionally, there exists a maximum number of RAMs as well as
```

> a maximal amount of storage. For B450M PRO-VDH MAX, this is 4 RAMs with in total

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a maximum amount of storage. For B450M PRO-VDH MAX, this is 4 RAMs with a total
```

> maximal 128 GB. By the way: 2 x 8 GB memories usually perform better than a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of up to 128 GB. By the way: 2 x 8 GB memories usually perform better than a
```

single 16 GB memory since they can be accessed in parallel. If you want to save
money you can start with a single 8 GB RAM and buy a second one later if you
want to.

> I recommend combining SDD and HDD drives. The SDD is still more expensive so I

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As I said earlier, I recommend combining SDD and HDD drives. The SDD is still more expensive so I
```

use it only for the operating system and programs that I use frequently. 256 GB
were enough for me so far. Data that I do not use that often like pictures of my
last vacation, I store on an HDD. Here I bought 1 TB. If you find out that
either the SDD or HDD is not enough you can buy a third drive later.

Lastly, you need a power supply, a computer housing and some thermal paste. For
the supply, you need to sum up the power requirements of your parts. Since there
is not so much price difference in low power segments, you can just buy a 400 W
power supply. This is enough even you add a low- to mid-range graphics card. As
for housing, you can almost choose whatever you like. Keep an eye on the form
factor and the provided interfaces. A housing with preinstalled fans makes it

> easier for you. The thermal paste needs to be put between the processer and the

Reviewer: Makes what easier?

> heat sink to guarantee optimal cooling. Sometimes the fan already has some

Reviewer: Usually, the fans that come with the boxed versions already have some thermal paste applied

thermal paste on it. Then, you do not need additional paste.

> So we have:

Reviewer: The parts list pops out of nowhere it seems.

Maybe say something like:
```suggestion
Here are the parts I have chosen for my computer:
```

| Part                                     | Price    |
| ---------------------------------------- | -------- |
| AMD Ryzen 3 3200G                        | 114€     |
| B450M PRO-VDH MAX                        | 76€      |
| Corsair Vengeance LPX 2x8GB DDR4 3000Mhz | 86€      |
| Silicon Power SSD 256 GB                 | 33€      |
| Seagate Barracuda HDD 1TB                | 36€      |
| be quiet! 400W power supply              | 42€      |
| Sharkoon VG5-V housing                   | 39€      |
| Thermal paste                            | 5€       |
| **Overall**                              | **431€** |

Note: These are today's prices, which can change every day and differ between
suppliers. Please do not understand it as an explicit recommendation. It is more
an example to show you that it is not necessary to have a super high-end

> computer. Of course, you can spend more if you like, but you also can downgrade

Reviewer: ```suggestion
computer. Of course, you can spend more if you like, but you can also downgrade
```

a bit and get even cheaper. For things we plan to do in this blog, a computer as
shown in the table will be sufficient.

# Windows, Linux, Mac?

So far we talked only about the hardware and not the software running on it. The
main software on a computer is the operating system. It has control of your

> system and manages all your programs such as your browser. Windows is probably

Reviewer: "such as your browser."

Sounds weird. Maybe because it's only one example given?

known by everyone, but there are also other operating systems available which
got more and more attention over the past years. How do they differ? Which one
is the best?

> Windows is installed on most machines. Many people like to use it because it is

Reviewer: Bold + microsoft:
```suggestion
**Microsoft Windows** is installed on most machines. Many people like to use it because it is
```

very simple and intuitive. It does not require any IT knowledge. A huge
advantage is that most software is available for Windows. Especially for gaming
Windows should be your choice. Also, the office packet with Word, Excel, Teams
and so on is very powerful. This makes it very interesting for companies as
well. Consequently, most office computers run Windows. On the downside, Windows
is not free to use. You need to buy a license to use it legally. Since Windows
is on so many machines and its users often do not have IT knowledge it is the
target of many computer viruses. This is reinforced by its complexity which
leads space for security issues. Therefore, do not click on dubious links or

> download things from untrusted websites (this applies to all systems!).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
download things from untrusted websites (this applies to all systems though!).
```

> Mac OS is the operating system of Apple. It is shipped with all Apple computers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mac OS is an operating system developed by Apple. It is shipped with all Apple computers
```

and intended to be used with Apple products only. There are ways to install it
on other machines, but this can be very tricky. Mac is different from Windows,
but still very easy and intuitive to use. In my opinion, it runs more smoothly
than Windows and looks nicer. While Windows sometimes hangs up, I never

> experienced this on a Mac. A Linux-like terminal lets programmers work

Reviewer: "Linux-like"

Linux not explained until this point. Might confuse newbies.

efficiently. The disadvantage is the price of Apple products and the limited

> choice of products.

Reviewer: As this post mainly deals with building an own computer, Mac OS is not an option, right?

Maybe add that info here.

Linux is a family of open-source operating systems. There are many so-called
Linux distributions available which all are build on top of the Linux kernel,
which is something like the heart of Linux. The kernel is combined with

> different software like a graphical interface to build a distribution. So,

Reviewer: Maybe put in italics or bold, because special word:
```suggestion
different software like a graphical interface to build a _distribution_. So,
```

internally all distributions work the same, but they appear differently to the
user. If you talk about Linux, you usually talk about all kinds of
distributions. Linux is very popular among software developers. It is free to
use, the source code is available and you can customize it as much as you like.
Since everyone can check the code, report failures and even contribute, it is a

> very stable and safe operating system. A terminal (we come to that in a later

Reviewer: Bold
```suggestion
very stable and safe operating system. A **terminal** (we come to that in a later
```

> post) offers a way for programmers to efficiently make use of the whole system.

Reviewer: "make use" or "control" ?

> Linux also offers a huge community, where you always can ask questions or chat

Reviewer: "offers" sounds a bit weird

> with people about your projects. As a disadvantage, it might take longer to get

Reviewer: get used to what? The "community" or "Linux"?

> used to it. This depends on the distribution you choose. Ubuntu is a well-known

Reviewer: Bold
```suggestion
used to it. This depends on the distribution you choose. **Ubuntu** is a well-known
```

> distribution that is also suitable for beginners. Arch Linux is probably the

Reviewer: Bold
```suggestion
distribution that is also suitable for beginners. **Arch Linux** is probably the
```

total opposite of it. In the basic version, you do not even have a graphical
interface. In our blog, we use the [Manjaro](https://manjaro.org/) distribution.
It builds on top of Arch Linux but is way easier to use. It tries to offer you
the possibilities of Arch and at the same time keep the simplicity of Ubuntu.

> The advantage and disadvantage at the same time is that Manjaro will have the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage and disadvantage at the same time is that Manjaro will receive the
```

newest software releases. Advantage because you have new software features
early. Disadvantage because you are likely to get undiscovered bugs. However,
Manjaro maintains its own software repositories and will test software that is
released by Arch before you will get it.

> Of course, you can go with any of the three operating systems. For the long

Reviewer: But users who build their own PC cannot go with Mac, right?

Author: They can buy one. Is not mandatory to build one. Just want to say here that from simple programming perspective all are possible

term, I recommend going with Linux. Yes, it requires some time and reading to

> get used to it. At some point, however, it will make things easier, because many

Reviewer: I feel like the point why Linux is especially useful in development (SW + HW), is missing here.

Author: Have the same feeling but hard to write it in 1 or 2 sentences. Let's talk about it

imply that it is not complicated. In fact, when I installed a dual boot system
the first time I had no clue what I was actually doing. However, there are good
tutorials you can just follow step by step without understanding the details. An
example is [this](https://linuxconfig.org/manjaro-linux-windows-10-dual-boot)
tutorial.

At **Bits&Volts** it is our goal to make you understand everything. The issue at
this point is that to completely understand everything a lot of detailed
knowledge is required. Let's save our energy and keep things simple for now.
What happens if you press the on button on your computer? First, the BIOS (Basic
Input-Output System) starts. The BIOS is located on the mainboard and its task
is to initialize your hardware such as storages. After that, it looks for a
bootloader that is responsible to load the operating system. When you install
Manjaro you replace the Windows bootloader with a bootloader called grub. This
new bootloader is able to handle multiple operating systems. Grub will stop the
boot process and ask you which operating system to boot. The process is very
simplified in the following picture.

TODO: picture

> What you have to do

Reviewer: to do for what? Maybe add:
```suggestion
What you have to do for installing Manjaro alongside Windows:
```

([Tutorial](https://linuxconfig.org/manjaro-linux-windows-10-dual-boot)):

1. Windows has to be installed
2. Resize your partitions <br> At the moment, the whole disk space is dedicated
   to Windows. So, you need to shrink the space for Windows and make it
   available for Manjaro. How you distribute the space is up to you. Manjaro
   recommends at least 30 GB of storage, but 128 GB or more are nice to have.
3. Create a bootable USB <br> An easy solution is to install Manjaro from a USB
   stick. Download Manjaro and create a bootable USB stick. Note that you cannot
   just copy the downloaded file on the USB stick. It has to be in a special
   format so that it can be recognized by the BIOS. The tutorial explains how to
   do it.
4. Boot from USB <br> This might require you to enter the BIOS menu. The BIOS
   has an order how it scans through the devices for a bootable one. You have to

>    make sure that the USB is check before the drive where Windows is installed.

Reviewer: "checked" ?

>    Otherwise, you end up booting Windows. To enter the BIOS menu you have to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Otherwise, you will end up booting Windows. To enter the BIOS menu you have to
```

>    press a button that depends on your hardware. Sometimes F11 sometimes ESC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   press a button during booting that depends on your hardware. Sometimes F11, sometimes ESC.
```

   You can check it in your mainboard's manual or look onto the normal boot
   screen. Usually, at the very beginning after turning on the computer a screen

>    shows the instruction on how to enter. Unfortunately, the time the screen is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   shows the instruction on how to enter the BIOS. Unfortunately, the time the screen is
```

---
layout: single
title: Computer Setup
category: Getting Started
permalink: /categories/getting_started/computer_setup
excerpt: "What computer do you need as a computer engineer?"
author: Bjoern Hartmann
toc: true
toc_label: "Content"
toc_sticky: true
toc_icon: "align-justify"
sidebar:
  nav: "getting_started_0"
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: /assets/images/getting_started.jpg
---

Welcome to our first **Getting Started** post. Have you ever dreamed of

> implementing your own custom electronics, but you don't quite know how to get

Reviewer: "custom electronics" sounds weird.

Maybe something with "electronics projects" ?

started? Then you've come to the right place! This category intends to create a
solid foundation for all kinds of projects in the area of electrical and
computer engineering. Our goal is to build enough knowledge so that your start
into the fascinating world of electronics can be as smooth and easy as possible.

> But it is not only intended for beginners. Believe it or not. Even trained

Reviewer: I would put a colon here:
```suggestion
But it is not only intended for beginners. Believe it or not: even trained
```

engineers with several years of professional experience sometimes lack basic
knowledge.

> In the following post, we start with the very basics - your computer. Nowadays,

Reviewer: This would sound better, IMO:
```suggestion
In this post, we start with the very basics - your computer. Nowadays,
```

it is almost impossible to do anything in engineering without a computer (hard
to imagine that people had to build the first computer without the help of a

> computer!:). Many things have to be considered when setting up a machine, which

Reviewer: I like that part in the brackets!

Maybe add a space before the smiley:
```suggestion
computer! :). Many things have to be considered when setting up a machine, which
```

will be the topic of this post. Shall we get started?

# A computer for all needs

If you want to dive into the field of electrical or computer engineering it is

> inevitable to have a suitable computer. But what does that actually mean? What

Reviewer: Maybe add "as we said earlier".

Author: Eh ... I do not understand what you mean. Where should I put it and why?

Reviewer: In the paragraph one above you already said that "it is
almost impossible to do anything in engineering without a computer".

That's why I thought the second one would sound like a repetition, which could be fixed with my suggestion.

offers. Second, we will discuss what kind of computer is required for most
electrical and computer engineering tasks. Is it a high-end machine? Spoiler
alert! It is not! The third part of this blog deals with the option of building
a computer by yourself. This is a great option if you want to completely decide
what goes into your computer and what not. After talking mainly about hardware
aspects, the fourth part will introduce the three major operating systems,
namely Windows, Mac OS, and Linux. Which one is most commonly used by engineers?
There is also the possibility of using multiple operating systems, which will be
explained in the last part.

Please feel free to skip to the part that is of interest to you. If you have
additional thoughts, we welcome your comments below.

# Computer parts

Every desktop computer contains the same key parts like a processor, memories, a
mainboard, and some sort of cooling. Each part can vary greatly from computer to
computer, both in performance and price. The price range for a usual personal
computer ranges from a few hundred euros up to a few thousand. Of course, there

> is no limit to the price. If you choose a computer you need to answer two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is no limit to the price. When you choose a computer you need to answer two
```

questions: Does the performance justify the price and does the performance fit
my requirements? For both questions, it is useful to be able to assess the power
of a computer. In the following, you will get an overview of the most important

> components of a computer and learn how to evaluate them.

Reviewer: I think "inside" would fit better?
```suggestion
components inside a computer and learn how to evaluate them.
```

## CPU

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-left">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_cpu.jpeg" alt="">
</figure>

Let's start with the brain of the computer, the **Central Processing Unit**

> (CPU). As the name suggests it processes the operations that are defined by a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(CPU). As the name suggests it processes the operations (or "instructions") that are defined by a
```
Because later you used "instructions", so would be good to introduce it here.

computer program. Often the term processor is used as a synonym, however, be
aware of the fact that there can be multiple processors inside a computer. If
you read computer advertisements you probably come across phrases like
'Quad-Core CPU at 3.6 GHz'. Indeed, these are two properties that describe the
performance of a CPU.

> 3.6 GHz means that the CPU can theoretical process 3.6 billion instructions per

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"3.6 GHz" means that this CPU can theoretical process 3.6 billion instructions per
```

> second. So it describes something like the speed of the processor and it is

Reviewer: Technically, it's not "something like", but it _is_ the speed of the processor, isn't?

```suggestion
second. So it basically describes the speed of the processor, and it is
```

> often referred as **frequency** of the CPU. Obviously, the higher the frequency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
often referred to as the **frequency** of the CPU. Obviously, the higher the frequency
```

sound similar, they are not the same. I am sure this will come up again in a
later post. Short-term means for this memory that the data is only valid as long
as the computer runs. As soon as you turn it off, all data will be lost. This is
the main reason why you should properly shut down a computer to make sure all
data is stored in a _long-term_ memory, which is explained next.

## HDD and SDD

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-left">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_hdd.jpeg" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">HDD</figcaption>
</figure>

Nowadays two different kinds of long-term memories find their way into home
computers. A **Hard Disk Drive** (HDD) was the only choice in the past, whereas
a **Solid State Drive** (SDD) is a newer and faster memory type. HDD is a
mechanical storage where some platters are spinning and a read arm reads and
writes the data. The mechanical part tends to make noise and the platters set a
limit on how small the drive can be manufactured. Moreover, the motor that spins
the platters requires additional energy and it takes time until the read arm is
moved to the right location.

> Compared to that, an SSD is not mechanical and typically uses flash (do not

Reviewer: I would put the "do not worry..." bracket at the end of the sentence.

Long brackets tend to break the reading flow.

worry if you do not know what it is; it's basically like the SD card in your
phone, or a USB drive) instead. So, there is no noise of spinning platters, the
SSD can be very small and light (very good for laptops!), the energy consumption
is lower (also good for laptops!) and an SSD is faster than a HDD. Sounds almost
too good to be true, right? Why are HDDs still used then?

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-right">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_ssd.png" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">SSD</figcaption>
</figure>

> From early days there exists the myth that SDDs will die early. But this is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From early days there exists the myth that SDDs would die early. But this is
```

nothing you have to concern about as a normal user. One concern, however, is the

> price. As of today, SDDs are more expensive and they can store less data than

Reviewer: Not sure about the "can store less data as HDD" part.

I think what would you wanted to say is, that the _price per GB_ is higher compared to HDDs ?

Author: Actually, I was trying to say that you can buy larger HDDs than SDDs. But as I checked this is not true anymore. You can buy an SDD with 100TB!!! Crazy! I changed the sentence

HDDs. This is why SSDs are often combined with HDDs. The SSD is used for
important things like your operating system and the HDD is used for data that is
rarely used and where you do not care so much about the speed. If you want to

> see a race between an HDD and an SDD starting computer you can watch

Reviewer: Last sentence sounds weird.

This part: "an SSD starting computer"

Author: I changed it

[this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4f4saFpRlvU) video.

## Graphics Card (GPU)

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-left">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_gpu.jpeg" alt="">
</figure>

> As the name suggests the graphics card was developed for handling extensive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the name suggests, the **graphics card** (or graphics processing unit, GPU) was developed for handling extensive
```

Author: I changed the order **graphics pr...** (or graphics card) ... CHeck it out

graphics applications like computer games. Over time, they also became

> attractive for computationally intensive applications such as neural networks

Reviewer: Maybe add Bitcoin mining as another example? So we pick up some currently relevant topics

(these cool algorithms that can detect your face or your cat or ...). This is

> because their design is optimized for matrix operations. A graphics card is not

Reviewer: Whose "design is optimized" ? The GPU's or the Neural Network's?

a mandatory part, so it is possible to save some money. Be warned! A graphics

> card is often the part that makes a computer super expensive. In the case, you

Reviewer: I wouldn't say "super". Something like GPUs are "the most expensive" would fit better. Because "super expensive" sounds like every computer with a GPU is unaffordable, which clearly doesn't apply to all PCs.

What do you think?

---

Also:
```suggestion
card is often the part that makes a computer super expensive. In the case you
```

> want to save that money, you need to pay attention that the processor includes a

Reviewer: This would fit better, IMO:

"In the case you want to save that money, you can also buy a CPU with an integrated graphics unit."

But up to you :)

graphics unit. Meanwhile, these included graphics units are quite good and it is
also possible to play light games with them. Graphics cards are also of interest

> if you plan to have a setup with any monitors (four or more). Most people I know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if you plan to have a setup with many monitors (three or more). Most people I know
```

use one or two monitors at home. This should be fine with the integrated
graphics unit.

## Mainboard

<figure style="width: 300px" class="align-right">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_mainboard.jpeg" alt="">
</figure>

The mainboard or motherboard is the place where everything is put together. The

> mainboard is a printed circuit board that allows the components to communicate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mainboard is a printed circuit board that allows all the components of the computer to communicate
```

with each other. Here, you can plugin in the parts mentioned above as well as a
power supply and cooling fans. It also provides external interfaces like USB

> ports. This is the place where everything communicates with each other.

Reviewer: Last sentence is repetition.

# Is a high-end computer necessary?

> No! Definitely no! But well ... It depends!. If you just want to get some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No! Definitely no! But well ... It depends! If you just want to get some
```

experience in coding, you technically don't even need to have full-blown
computer. There are even small pocket-sized computers, such as the Raspberry Pi,

> that can be used like a 'normal' computer. If you plan to work with algorithms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that can be used like a 'normal' computer. However, if you plan to work with algorithms
```

that process a huge amount of data or are computationally expensive, such as
machine learning, you require a computer with higher performance. In electrical

> engineering, often powerful algorithms are used to, for example, place and route

Reviewer: I think "place and route" is probably unfamilliar to a new reader.
Maybe just simply:
```suggestion
engineering, often powerful algorithms are used to design
```

circuits. If you plan to design you own chip, then having a powerful computer
can speed up the process (by the way, in case you haven't seen it already, we
also have another category, [Digital Design](/categories/digital_design/), where
we will talk about how chips are designed). But still, it does not have to be a
high-end computer. As an example, I paid 447€ for my computer plus 127€ for a
graphics card. The latter I mostly use for gaming so you can ignore it. I will
give a more detailed description in the next section.

# Build your own computer

Building a computer on your own is not as hard as it sounds. The challenging
part is to choose parts that match your application as well as your budget. The
rest is more or less putting some cables together. I will not go into detail for

> the latter part since you can find enough videos like

Reviewer: Maybe put the "like this" in brackets

[this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7DVOQrs1N40) on Youtube. Please,
understand that the market situation can change rapidly, so the following is

> more an example and the situation could have changed until you read this post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more an example and the situation could have changed already when read this post.
```

Author: already when **you**

market for good deals. This is a good way to get a market overview. Then I
usually start with the selection of a CPU. As mentioned earlier it is not easy
to directly compare CPUs. So-called **benchmarks** try to provide an overall
score considering multiple aspects. You can use websites like
[www.cpubenchmark.net](https://www.cpubenchmark.net/) to compare CPUs.
Additionally, a mark/price ranking is provided as shown in the picture below.

<figure class="align-center">
  <img src="/assets/images/gs_0001_mark_price.jpeg" alt="">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">Best CPU value (Mark/Price)
  </figcaption>
</figure>

In this case, I would probably choose the AMD Ryzen 3 3200G as it provides
enough power at a reasonable price and includes a graphics unit, so an
additional graphics card is not required. Processors are usually available as
'boxed' or 'tray' versions. The boxed version is intended for end-users and
includes a heat sink and fan. The fan is mostly not the best available, but in
my experience, it is always fine so I would not bother and just buy the boxed
one.

Next, a mainboard is required. Make sure that you choose one that matches the

> socket of the processor which is in this case an AM4. An example could be the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_socket_ of the processor which is in this case an AM4. An example could be the
```

B450M PRO-VDH MAX. It offers enough interfaces like 4 DIMM slots for your RAM, 4
SATA connectors for your HDD and SDD drives, in total 6 USB 3.2 ports, VGA,
HDMI, and DVI-D for your monitors.

As for RAM, I would use 2 x 8 GB DDR4 memory. Note that you have to match the
specification of the motherboard and CPU. If the CPU requires DDR4 you cannot
use a RAM with DDR3. Also, pay attention to the clock speed. The higher the

> speed the better the performance as long it is supported by the CPU and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
speed, the better the performance as long it is supported by the CPU and
```

motherboard. Additionally, there exists a maximum number of RAMs as well as a
maximal amount of storage. For B450M PRO-VDH MAX, this is 4 RAMs with a total of
up to 128 GB. By the way: 2 x 8 GB memories usually perform better than a single
16 GB memory since they can be accessed in parallel. If you want to save money

> you can start with a single 8 GB RAM and buy a second one later if you want to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can start with a single 8 GB RAM and buy a second one later if you need to.
```

Here are the parts I described above:

| Part                                     | Price    |
| ---------------------------------------- | -------- |
| AMD Ryzen 3 3200G                        | 114€     |
| B450M PRO-VDH MAX                        | 76€      |
| Corsair Vengeance LPX 2x8GB DDR4 3000Mhz | 86€      |
| Silicon Power SSD 256 GB                 | 33€      |
| Seagate Barracuda HDD 1TB                | 36€      |
| be quiet! 400W power supply              | 42€      |
| Sharkoon VG5-V housing                   | 39€      |
| Thermal paste                            | 5€       |
| **Overall**                              | **431€** |

Note: These are today's prices, which can change every day and differ between
suppliers. Please do not understand it as an explicit recommendation. It is more
an example to show you that it is not necessary to have a super high-end
computer. Of course, you can spend more if you like, but you can also downgrade
a bit and get even cheaper. For things we plan to do in this blog, a computer as
shown in the table will be sufficient.

# Windows, Linux, Mac?

So far we talked only about the hardware and not the software running on it. The

> main software on a computer is the operating system. It has control of your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main software on a computer is the **operating system**. It has control of your
```

system and manages all your programs such as your browser, your email client or
your music application. Windows is probably known by everyone, but there are
also other operating systems available which got more and more attention over

> the past years. How do they differ? Which one is the best?

Reviewer: Maybe so?
```suggestion
the past years. How do they differ? And which one is the best?
```

**Microsoft Windows** is installed on most machines. Many people like to use it
because it is very simple and intuitive. It does not require any IT knowledge. A
huge advantage is that most software is available for Windows. Especially for

> gaming Windows should be your choice. Also, the office packet with Word, Excel,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gaming, Windows should be your choice. Also, the office packet with Word, Excel,
```

Teams and so on is very powerful. This makes it very interesting for companies
as well. Consequently, most office computers run Windows. On the downside,
Windows is not free to use. You need to buy a license to use it legally. Since

> Windows is on so many machines and its users often do not have IT knowledge it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Windows is present on so many machines, and its users often do not have IT knowledge it
```

is the target of many computer viruses. This is reinforced by its complexity
which leads space for security issues. Therefore, do not click on dubious links
or download things from untrusted websites (this applies to all systems
though!).

**Mac OS** is an operating system developed by Apple. It is shipped with all

> Apple computers and intended to be used with Apple products only. So, it is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apple computers and is intended to be used with Apple products only. So, it is not
```

an option if you want to build your own computer. There are ways to install it
on other machines, but this can be very tricky. Mac is different from Windows,

> but still very easy and intuitive to use. In my opinion, it runs more smoothly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but still very easy and intuitive to use. In my experience, it runs more smoothly
```

than Windows and looks nicer. While Windows sometimes hangs up, I never
experienced this on a Mac. A Linux-like terminal (we come to that soon) lets
programmers work efficiently. The disadvantage is the price of Apple products
and the limited choice of products.

**Linux** is a family of open-source operating systems. There are many so-called

> Linux distributions available which all are build on top of the Linux kernel,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linux _distributions_ available which all are build on top of the Linux _kernel_,
```

which is something like the heart of Linux. The kernel is combined with

> different software like a graphical interface to build a _distribution_. So,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different software like a graphical interface to build a distribution. So,
```

internally all distributions work the same, but they appear differently to the

> user. If you talk about Linux, you usually talk about all kinds of

Reviewer: That "if you talk about ..." sentence can be removed, I think. Its message has been more or less said in the previous sentences, no?

> distributions. Linux is very popular among software developers. It is free to

Reviewer: What about hardware developers?

Author: I did not put it in here, because there are many hardware tools that only exist for Windows or they are equal for both systems. Maybe I can just use developers in leave "software" out?

use, the source code is available and you can customize it as much as you like.
Since everyone can check the code, report failures and even contribute, it is a
very stable and safe operating system. A **terminal** (we come to that in a

> later post) offers a way for programmers to efficiently control of the whole

Reviewer: ```suggestion
later post) offers a way for users to efficiently control of the whole
```

> system. Linux also has a huge community, where you always can ask questions or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
system. Linux also has a huge community, where you can always ask questions or
```

chat with people about your projects. As a disadvantage, it might take longer to
get used to a Linux system. This depends on the distribution you choose.
**Ubuntu** is a well-known distribution that is also suitable for beginners.

> **Arch Linux** is probably the total opposite of it. In the basic version, you

Reviewer: To make clear that the sentence refers to Arch.
```suggestion
**Arch Linux** is probably the total opposite of it. In its basic version, you
```

Alternative:
```suggestion
**Arch Linux** is probably the total opposite of it: In its basic version, you
```

same time is that Manjaro will receive the newest software releases. Advantage
because you have new software features early. Disadvantage because you are
likely to get undiscovered bugs. However, Manjaro maintains its own software
repositories and will test software that is released by Arch before you will get
it.

Of course, you can go with any of the three operating systems. For the long
term, I recommend going with Linux. Yes, it requires some time and reading to
get used to it. At some point, however, it will make things easier and more fun.
Free to use, open-source, highly configurable and a great community are things
Windows or Mac OS cannot compete with. The next posts in this category will help
you to get started with Linux. If you prefer to use another distribution other
than Manjaro this is also fine. Our instructions will be for Manjaro but
usually, they are the same for all distributions or they can be translated
easily.

As an option, you can install multiple operating systems on one computer. For
example, Windows for gaming and Linux for programming. How this can be achieved
is explained in the next section.

# Dual Boot

> Even Windows has a bad reputation among many developers (sometimes it really

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though Windows has a bad reputation among many developers (sometimes it really
```

sucks!) it still has its advantages. Especially in gaming, it is still the
system you should have. A question might pop up in your head! Can I have both,
Linux and Windows? Also, if you already have a computer with Windows running on
it you might want to keep it and install Linux next to it. Here is the good
news. It is possible and not too difficult. Though, 'not too difficult' does not
imply that it is not complicated. In fact, when I installed a dual boot system
the first time I had no clue what I was actually doing. However, there are good
tutorials you can just follow step by step without understanding the details. An
example is [this](https://linuxconfig.org/manjaro-linux-windows-10-dual-boot)
tutorial.

At **Bits&Volts** it is our goal to make you understand everything. The issue at
this point is that to completely understand everything a lot of detailed
knowledge is required. Let's save our energy and keep things simple for now.

> What happens if you press the on button on your computer? First, the BIOS (Basic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What happens when you press the on button on your computer? First, the BIOS (Basic
```

> Input-Output System) starts. The BIOS is located on the mainboard and its task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Input-Output System) starts. The BIOS is a small program stored on the mainboard and its task
```

is to initialize your hardware such as storages. After that, it looks for a
bootloader that is responsible to load the operating system. When you install

> Manjaro you replace the Windows bootloader with a bootloader called grub. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manjaro you replace the Windows bootloader with a bootloader called _grub_. This
```
